Create top-5-programming-language-for-backend-web-programmers.md (#87)
teknologi-umum/blog: content/top-5-programming-language-for-backend-web-programmers.md

---
title: Top 5 Programming Language for Serious Backend Programmer
desc: Top 5 Programming Language for Serious Backend Programmer
author: Valian Masdani
github: vmasdani
twitter: VMasdani
telegram: vmasdani
cover: https://content.techgig.com/thumb/msid-67337479,width-860,resizemode-4/Top-5-programming-languages-for-backend-web-development.jpg?94297
date: 2022-02-05
categories:
  - backend
  - web
  - programming
---

There are tons upon tons of programming languages in the market nowadays, and it might be overwhelming for people who just started programming. This question is often asked among the beginner programmers:

**How do we pick the right programming language?**

Here's the thing about picking the most powerful, best ever programming language:

1. You can't
2. It depends

Why **can't you**? Because there are always a few considerations in picking a programming language for a certain field of work/expertise. In my experience, some of them includes:

1. **Popularity**  

>    Is the language commonly used? Does it have big communities? Are big companies using it, supporting it, and endorsing it?  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   Is the language commonly used? Does it have large communities? Are big companies using it, supporting it, and endorsing it?  
```

>    Popularity should be a strong factor in deciding which tech to use, because the bigger the community is, the easier for you to find a solution to a sometimes weird and quirky problem in a programming language, compiler, tooling, etc. You don't want to spend a few days trying to fix a weird bug when the fix is actually just adding a semicolon or comma, adding a single configuration line, or simple stupid things that can cost you precious time when trying to fix it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   Popularity should be a strong factor in deciding which tech to use, because the larger the community is, the easier for you to find a solution to a sometimes weird and quirky problem in a programming language, compiler, tooling, etc. You don't want to spend a few days trying to fix a weird bug when the fix is actually just adding a semicolon or comma, adding a single configuration line, or simple stupid things that can cost you precious time when trying to fix it.
```

2. **Demand**  
   This one applies if you are looking for programming language for work related purposes. You do not want to learn a language which has little to none job vacancies with decent pay to put food on your table.

3. **Local community**  
   Sometimes it's best to learn a particular tech within a local community in your area (city, country, university, etc). In some cases you can even share your knowledge in such social circles, brainstorm ideas clearer in person, and comfortably talk to people with common interest.

4. **Paradigm & use cases**  

>    Always use the right tool for the right job. For example, you don't want to use low level languages (C, C++, Rust) to to prototype and build proof of concepts, we have high level languages (Javascript, Python, Go) for that. And you also don't want to use a high level language for something like a smart watch, set top boxes, or a micro-controller because they tend to have very little memory, and in this case low level language is better suited than the high level ones.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   Always use the right tool for the right job. For example, you don't want to use low level languages (C, C++, Rust) to to prototype and build proof of concepts, we have high level languages (Javascript, Python, Go) for that. And you also don't want to use a high level language for something like a smart watch, set top boxes, or a micro-controller because they tend to have very small memory, and in this case low level language is better suited than the high level ones.
```

On top of the modern programming language features, Kotlin has 100% interoperability with Java, which makes Spring Boot also 100% compatible with Kotlin!

Here's how a Spring Boot REST API project in Kotlin typically looks like:

- Model

```kotlin
@Entity
data class Person(
   @Id
   @GeneratedValue(strategy=GenerationType.AUTO)
   var id: Long? = null,
   var name: String? = null,

   @ManyToOne
   var department: Department? = null,

   @CreationTimestamp
   var createdAt: Instant? = null
   @UpdateTimestamp
   var updatedAt: Instant? = null
)
```

- Repository

```kotlin
interface PersonRepository : JpaRepository<Person, Long>, JpaSpecificationExecutor<Person> {
}
```

- Controller

```kotlin
@RestController
class PersonController(
   private val environment: Environment,
   private val personRepository : PersonRepository
) {
   @GetMapping("/people")
   fun all() = personRepository.findAll()

   @GetMapping("/people/{id}")
   fun get(@PathVariable id: Long) = personRepository.findById(id)

   @PostMapping("/people")
   fun post(@RequestBody person: Person)
      = ResponseEntity.status(HttpStatus.CREATED).body(personRepository.save(person))
}
```

> Writing Spring Boot codes using Kotlin is very productive. Many of the reasons are because of:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Writing Spring Boot codes in Kotlin is very productive. Many of the reasons being:
```

> - **function return inference** which can lead to writing very concise controller functions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Function return type inference** which can lead to writing very concise controller functions.
```

> - **dataclasses**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Data classes**
```

  which enables you to create a struct/record data type without **getters** and **setters**. Although you can generate getters and setters through most JVM-based IDEs like **IntelliJ Idea Community** and **Eclipse IDE**, not having to write getters and setters is very intuitive and not time-consuming.

> - **declarative utility functions** such as **map, filter, fold** which Java does not (natively) have, and makes writing loops very, very concise.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Declarative utility functions** such as **map, filter, fold** which Java does not (natively) have, and makes writing loops very, very concise.
```

```kotlin
// find something in array
val found = people.find { p -> p.id == selectedID }

// filter people more than 22 years old
val ageTwentyTwo = people.filter { p -> p.age > 22 }

// map people's ages
val onlyAges = people.map { p -> p.age }

```

- Lastly, one of the most important benefit of writing in Kotlin is **null safety**. Rolling-release project model which has very fast-changing RDBMS is very prone to error, and the data that is returned from the RDBMS might not always have a value, which might be a result of **column update**. But the null safety feature in Kotlin prevents your program from getting a random **null pointer exception** which you might will often encounter while writing Java due to Java not having nullable types, so it assumes that every variables are nullable by default, so you can't accidentally unpack a property which is actually **null** while writing Kotlin.

However, as good as Spring + Kotlin is, I would not choose Spring + Kotlin or any JVM based runtime to create a new web-based project these days, because of:

> 1. **Memory constraints**: JVM apps are notorious for having very big memory usage

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. **Memory constraints**: JVM apps are notorious for having very high memory usage
```

> 2. **Asynchronous routines not first-class**. Although Kotlin has a neat green threads/coroutines system in the `kotlinx` library, Spring/Spring Boot does not natively support them, and setting them up is painful if you are not used to JVM project management system such as Gradle/Maven

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. **Asynchronous routines are not first-class**. Although Kotlin has a neat green threads/coroutines system in the `kotlinx` library, Spring/Spring Boot does not natively support them, and setting them up is painful if you are not used to JVM project management system such as Gradle/Maven
```

> If you or your company already has a Spring Boot project with Java, I really, really recommend migrating to Kotlin because the developer experience and productivity is like night and day.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you or your company already has a Spring Boot project with Java, I really, really recommend migrating to Kotlin because the difference in developer experience and productivity is like night and day.
```

```go
// Exported
func FormatDateTime() {

}

// Not exported
func formatDateTime() {

}
```

and there are many more pragmatic language designs and shorthand/sugar syntaxes. Such as variable declaration:

```go
// these both are the same
var myVar int = 0
myVar := 0
```

If you have written Python before, you might notice that variable declaration is the same in both python and go, just write the variable name and then assign it to a value, like `myVar := 0`. But the difference is that Go **infers** the variable type of a value, meaning that Go knows the type of the value zero (0) and will automatically assign zero as `int`. This is a modern programming language compiler technique called [Type inference](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Type_inference), while Python uses [Duck typing](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Duck_typing).

Creating an HTTP server with router is very easy in Golang. Using the `gorilla/mux` package, we can write a barebone REST server as simple as this:

````go
package main

import (
    "net/http"
    "log"
    "github.com/gorilla/mux"
)

func YourHandler(w http.ResponseWriter, r *http.Request) {
    w.Write([]byte("Gorilla!\n"))
}

> There are tons upon tons of programming languages in the market nowadays, and it might be overwhelming for people who just started programming. This question is often asked among the beginner programmers:

Reviewer 2: Did you wrongly copy and paste the blog post?

   Golang does not have a null safety operator, because the language is closer to machine and **nullable types** must be wrapped in a pointer.

   In C#, you can do something like this, in case you want to get an information from deeply nested objects:

   ```csharp
   ...

   val pCompanyAddress = person
      ?.Company
      ?.Address
      ?.Name;

   ...
   ```

   But in Go, you have to have a thorough null check in each nested property.

   ```go
   pCompanyAddress := ""

   if person.Company != nil && person.Company.Address != nil {
      pCompanyAddress = person.Company.Address.Name
   }

   ```

   There's a whole discussion about why null safety is not implemented in Go, see this [GitHub issue](https://github.com/golang/go/issues/42847)

Despite all these cons, Go is a really, really nice language which balances between developer experience which makes writing code fast, safe, and scalable, but also does not compromise performance--meaning that code written in Go is really fast, and very robust if your error handling game is played correctly. Memory usage is **very lightweight** too with Go. Definitely a correct option to pick Go for creating new projects in 2022.

> Go is an excellent language for [gRPC](https://grpc.io/) too, but that leaves a room for another article.

Reviewer: Dari sini ke atas sampai commentnya Reinaldy kaya duplikat

## 1. .NET Core / C#

- **Typing**: Strong, static
- **Founder**: Microsoft
- **Paradigm**: multi paradigm, mainly object-oriented

This framework which is created by Microsoft is often given a negative impression at first glance because of the name **Microsoft** associated with .NET framework, but I assure you, nothing is about money-grabbing software made by greedy big corporations here.

There's a good [article](https://www.excella.com/insights/5-myths-about-net) about the misconceptions or myths about .NET, which points are:

> 1. .Net Only Runs on Windows

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. .Net Only Runs on Windows ❌ HOAX ❌
```

Tolong dikasih semacam indikator negasi gini biar orang yang bacanya scanning ngga salah nangkap

$ dotnet add package Pomelo.EntityFrameworkCore.MySql --version 6.0.1
$ dotnet add package Microsoft.EntityFrameworkCore.Tools --version 6.0.1
```

And install the EF tools using this command

```sh
$ dotnet tool install --global dotnet-ef
```

Then in your `Program.cs`, put this code:

```csharp
using System.ComponentModel.DataAnnotations.Schema;
using Microsoft.EntityFrameworkCore;

var builder = WebApplication.CreateBuilder(args);
builder.Services.AddDbContext<ApplicationContext>(optionsBuilder => optionsBuilder.UseMySql("server=localhost;database=employeescstest;user=root;password=", ServerVersion.AutoDetect("server=localhost;database=employeescstest;user=root;password=")));
var app = builder.Build();

app.MapGet("/employee-add", async (ApplicationContext ctx) =>
{
    var emp = new Employee
    {
        Name = "MyName",
        Uuid = Guid.NewGuid().ToString()
    };
    ctx.Update(emp);
    await ctx.SaveChangesAsync();
    return emp;
});
app.MapGet("/employees", (ApplicationContext ctx) => ctx.Employee);

// Migrate
using (var ctx = new ApplicationContext())
{
    ctx.Database.Migrate();
}

app.Run();

class Employee
{

>     [DatabaseGenerated(DatabaseGeneratedOption.Identity)]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    [Key, DatabaseGenerated(DatabaseGeneratedOption.Identity)]
```

>     public long? ID { get; set; }

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    public long ID { get; set; }
```

    public string? Uuid { get; set; }
    public string? Name { get; set; }

    [DatabaseGenerated(DatabaseGeneratedOption.Identity)]
    public DateTime? Created { get; set; }
}

class ApplicationContext : DbContext
{
    public ApplicationContext(DbContextOptions options) : base(options)
    {
    }

    public ApplicationContext()
    {

>     }

Reviewer: Constructor tanpa parameter ini bisa dihapus
